# SBC6526

SBC6526 is a single board computer built around A 65c02 CPU. It has been designed with a very specific purpose, that has defined both its name and its specs. I've been working for some time already on a MOS6526 (The famous CIA used in Commodore Computers) replica using 74xx logic series ICs. Testing was done on a real C64, but soon this prove to be a very limiting factor. So I begin working on a small SBC, designed entirely around the 6526, that should allow me to run as many tests, with no limitations at all.

The initial set of requisites was

* Continuosly variable clock, from 1MHz to as far as possible, in order to push my replica to its limits
* Clock Frequency Display. Useful, and should look very cool.
* No input at all. Program the ROM (more on this later) and just run a suite of tests for the 6526.
* Basic output.. Something like a 20x4 Character LCD will do.
* Easy, quick, and on board ROM programming. I will be modifiying the code continuosly, so this is very important.
* Include a 6522. Why not!? It can also be useful for the tests
* Include a socket for a 6526. Compatibility with old NMOS 6526 is not needed, although it would be nice.
* Allow testing of all 6526 pins. Ports, serial, /FLAG interrupt, etc
* Independent reset for 6526.

SBCv1 came to life, fulfilling this requirements. Howeever, after using it for some time, it show some weakness. SBCv1 has a 6522 and a 6526. A 4x40 LCD is used as display, driven by the 6526. This causes the display to blank when running some tests, and sometimes, crashed the LCD into an unrecoverable state, that requires a complete power down. This along some layout issues, forced the next revision. 

## Memory Map

(TBD)

> ###### IMPORTANT NOTE
> SBCv1, even with some issues, has been tested. It works, and it's somehow usable. SBCv2 exists only as a schematic. If, by some weird reason, you try and build one of these... I offer no guarantee at all!

> ###### ABOUT THE README
> This readme will be updated as soon as new content is commited to the repository.

# v2.0
Being my first attempt at creating a SBC, v1 had many flaws. There were some pull-up resistors missing, the PCB layout was a mess, the bootstrap code was... well... unreadable to be honest. Moreover, the CAD tool I choose for v1, Eagle Cad, has a nasty licensing which is pulling away many users. I decided to make the transition to KiCAD for the v2. It's still a work in progress, and completely untested, but feel free to take a look if you like.

SBCv2 adds a second 6526. There's a 40 pin DIP socket that accepts both a MOS6526 or any modern replacement. Second 6526 connects over a 40 pin IDC that matches the 74HCT6526 interface. The LCD is now driven by the 6522, so both 6526 are 100% usable for testing. 

On SBCv1, TOD in the 6526 was used to determine clock speed. Now, a 60hz signal generated by the arduino goes into the 6522 for this purpose. SBC6526 can now startup and run with no 6526 connected at all. 

## BootStrap

The SBC6526 has no ROM. RAM exists between 0000-7FFF and C000-FFFF. As you know, the 6502 CPU needs the startup vectors to be present in the last segment of memory so, how does the SBC6526 boot?

An Arduino NANO handles the startup sequence. On startup, it brings BE low, disconnecting the 6502 from the address and data busses, and the R/W line. This also enables a pair of 8bit shift registers that handle from now on the address bus.

The RAM IC has 2 enable inputs. One is controled via the SBC Address Decoding logic, the other, directly by the ARDUINO. During BootStraping, RAMCE pulses with PHI2 (independent from the arduino) and the Arduino pulses CE line. This is a bit unorthodox and may cause some failures to write, if the arduino pulse happens when PHI2 is  high. This is handled by trying several times to write.

When the ROM image is written, BE is released, and the 6502 is resetted by the Arduino itself.

## KiCAD

Full schematic and PCB. The migration from EagleCAD to KiCAD has not been easy, as I was very much used to EagleCad. But the change as been worth the effort. 

## Firmware

With little architectural changes from v1, original firmware will need just some minor changes. Most important one, LCD screen is now driven by the 6522 instead of the 6526. Also, the internal clock measurement has to be done also with the 6522. Memory map will be the same, with just a second CIA added into an empty IO Slot

# v1.0

## SBCv1.sch and SBCv1.brd

These files are the first "production " run of my SBC. It has some issues though:

1. Missing a 3K3 Pull-Up Resistor on the /IRQ line
2. Missing 4 3K3 Pull-Up Resistors on the 4 input buttons
3. LCD connector has to be soldered on the bottom of the PCB, as there's no space on top of it for the connector. Because of this, the cable connected to the LCD has all the even/odd wires interchanged. A quick hack, but works. v2 Will solve this
4. The two left stands for the LCD don't have space either on the PCB, so the build is a bit.. unstable.
5. The power jack is completely disposable. A arduino nano gives enough current for the SBC to work up to 15 Mhz

The adjustable clock works, but it tops at around 17 MHz, beyond that, it won't work at all.

LED2 and LED3 common cathod signals are reversed, solved on this version by cutting the traces and adding some bodge wires.

## bootstrap.ino (and RAm595 library)
Arduino code to upload an image to ram. Arduino listens on the serial port for the following commands

- S         : Pulls BE low, disconnecting the 6502 from the bus and enabling the shift registers
- A 0000    : Sets the address bus to 0000
- R 0000    : Reads and returns over serial value at memory location 0000
- W 0000 00 : Writes 00 in memory location 0000
- X         : Pulls BE high, disabling the shift registers and reenabling the 6502. The CPU is then reset and code execution begins
- B 0000 00 000F : Bulk program, staring at 0000 for 000F bytes. Maximum is 1K (0400). Bytes sent to the arduino after this are written sequentially on memory


## RAMFLASHER.java
Java code to program a .bin file to the SBC. Right now, the address and source file are hardcoded.  Requires jSerialComm-2.6.1.jar

## SBC_TEST_v1
- First firmware. It implements basic IO functions. Handles the LCD screen with a movable window in memory (0x7000 - 0x7fff). Up and Down buttons move the window. All string funcitions move a virtual cursor through the memory map.
- LCD refresh is implemented via interrupts with VIA Timer. The whole screen is redraw 5 time per sec and the keyboard scanned.
- customizable calls are executed whenever any button is pressed. Memory Location 0x30 contains the pressed key to be read by software.

## SBC_TEST_v2
- Last firmware. Main code is splitted into several libraries, and a stripped down version of the firmware has been created to run with a LOGISIM model found at https://github.com/dmolinagarcia/LOGISIM6526


